1. Define the following terms:
==============================

It's a good idea to begin this honor with the definitions so your Pathfinders have a working vocabulary of the various terms involved. Telling them to "make a bight" or "take the standing part" makes little sense until these terms are understood.

A bight

a. Bight
    The term bight refers to any curved section, slack part, or loop between the two ends of a rope, 

b. Running end
    The free end of the rope, usually shorter. This is the end of the rope in which a knot is being tied. 
c. Standing part
    The part of the rope between the Running end and the Standing end (the end that doesn't move, think of it as if someone is holding it) 
d. Underhand loop
    A loop formed by passing the running end of a line under the standing part. 
e. Overhand loop
    A loop formed by passing the running end of a line over the standing part. 
f. Turn


A turn is a component of a knot. Turns can be made around objects, through rings, or around the standing part of the rope itself. Turns come in various forms, distinguished by the number of passes that the rope makes. A turn or single turn requires one pass. The line makes a U-shape through or around the object, or half a revolution. A round turn requires two passes and makes one and a half revolutions. Two round turns adds another pass and revolution.


g. Bend
    A bend is used to tie two ropes together, as in the Sheetbend. Technically, even the Reef knot is a bend. 
h. Hitch
    A hitch is used to tie a rope to a spar, ring or post, such as the Clove hitch. Hitches can also be used to tie one rope ONTO another rope, as in the Rolling hitch. 
i. Splice
    A knot formed by interweaving strands of rope rather than whole lines. More time consuming but usually stronger than simple knots. 
j. Whipping
    A binding knot used to prevent another line from fraying. 


2. Know how to care for rope.
=============================
    a. Keep the rope clean.
    b. Always coil a rope before storing it.
    c. Make sure wet rope is dry before coiling it.
    d. Return rope to its proper place after using it.


3. Describe the difference between laid rope and braided rope and list three uses of each.
==========================================================================================

In laid rope, three bundles of fiber or twine are twisted in the same direction, placed close to each other, and allowed to twist together. In braided rope, the fibers are woven together, often around some core material.
Uses of Laid Rope

    Repels water.
    Able to withstand immense strain.
    Can be spliced with standard techniques.

Uses of Braided Rope

    Works well with pulleys and rigging.
    Spinning (lariats and lassos).
    Decorative knots.


4. Identify the following types of rope:
========================================

a. Manila
    Manila is a type of fiber obtained from the leaves of the abacá (Musa textilis), a relative of the banana. It is mostly used to make ropes and it is one of the most durable of the natural fibers, besides true hemp. Manila is a coarse, brown fiber, about the same color and feel as a coconut shell. 
b. Sisal
    Sisal is valued for cordage use because of its strength, durability, ability to stretch, affinity for certain dyestuffs, and resistance to deterioration in saltwater. Sisal ropes and twines are widely employed for marine, agricultural (bailing twine), and general industrial use. Sisal fibers are smooth, straight and yellow and can be long or short. 
c. Nylon
    Nylon rope is often white, but any color is possible. It has a smooth, silky feeling to it, and it coils easily. Nylon rope does not float in water. It is a synthetic-fiber rope. 
d. Polypropylene
    Polypropylene rope is most often yellow, though any color is possible. It is often used in marine applications because it floats in water. The rope is sometimes difficult to tie as it is somewhat stiff and brittle. It is a synthetic-fiber rope. 

The easiest way to make an initial identification of a rope is to visit a hardware store where rope is sold. The packaging will tell you what the rope is made of. If you want to be sure, buy some of each type (with the labeling) or examine it closely in the store. 


5. What are some advantages and disadvantages of synthetic rope?
================================================================

Advantages

    Improved abrasion-resistance
    Better UV-resistance
    Lighter
    Length does not vary as much when wet
    Rot-resistant

Disadvantages

    Some synthetics do not hold knots well
    More slippery
    Melts when heated
    Stretches more than natural ropes.



8. From memory tie at least 20 of the following knots and know their common uses and limitations. Demonstrate how they are used.
Anchor bend
Anchor bend
Ankersteek.svg
AnchorBend HowTo.jpg

Use: The Anchor Bend is a knot used for attaching a rope to a ring or similar termination. The round turn and tight application help keep the rope from chafing.

How to tie:

    Make two turns around a hitch.
    Pass the running end around the standing end and beneath the two turns.
    Finish with a half hitch on the standing end.


Bowline
Bowline
Knot bowline.jpg

Use: This knot doesn't jam or slip when tied properly. It can be tied around a person's waist and used to lift him, because the loop will not tighten under load. In sailing, the bowline is used to tie a halyard to a sail head.

How to tie:

    Make the overhand loop with the end held toward you, then pass end through loop.
    Now pass end up behind the standing part, then down through the loop again.
    Draw up tight.


Bowline on a bight
Bowline on a bight
Bowline-bight-animated.gif

Use: This makes a secure loop in the middle of a rope which does not slip.

How to tie:
A bight is the middle part of the rope (not the ends)

    In the middle of a rope, form a small loop.
    Thread the bight through the loop.
    Spread out the bight a little.
    Pass this down and around the whole knot.
    Continue until it come back to the neck where it started.
    Tighten the bight to complete the knot. Tighten carefully so that you don't get a kind of slip knot.


Butterfly loop knot or Alpine butterfly knot
Alpine butterfly
Alpine butterfly on the bight howto.jpg
Alpine butterfly loop.jpg

Use: The Butterfly Loop has a high breaking strength and is regarded by mountaineers as one of the strongest knots to attach climbers to the middle of a rope, such that they have room to move around even when the main rope goes tight, and they can be supported in either direction from the main rope. The loop is typically attached to a climbing harness by carabiner. It can also be used to isolate a worn section of rope, where the knot is tied such that the worn section is used for the center of the loop.


Carrick bend
Carrick bend
A fully interwoven diagonally opposed Carrick bend
Carrick-bend-seized-ABOK-1439.jpg

Use: The Carrick bend is used for joining two lines. It is particularly appropriate for very heavy rope or cable that is too large and stiff to easily be formed into other common bends. It will not jam even after carrying a significant load or being soaked with water. The Carrick bend's aesthetically pleasing interwoven and symmetrical shape has also made it popular for decorative purposes.

In the interest of making the Carrick bend easier to untie, especially when tied in extremely large rope, the ends may be seized to prevent the knot from collapsing when load is applied. This practice also keeps the knot's profile flatter and can ease its passage over capstans or winches.
The ends are traditionally seized to their standing part using a Round seizing. For expediency, a series of double constrictor knots, drawn very tight, may also be used. When seizing the Carrick bend, both ends must be secured to their standing parts or the bend will slip.

WARNING: The Carrick bend is generally tied in a flat interwoven form shown above. Without additional measures it will capsize (collapse) under load into a secure and stable, although bulky, form. If the knot is allowed to capsize naturally under tension, considerable slippage of line through the knot can occur before tightening. The knot should be upset carefully into the capsized form and worked up tight before actual use.


Cat's paw
Cat's paw
Catspawknot.png

Use: The Cat's paw is used for connecting a rope to an object.

    Attaching a rope to a hook (or to a post or rail where the load is perpendicular to the post) with more security than a simple girth hitch.
    Joining an eye to a ring.
    Strongly joining eyes in the ends of two lines, where there is access to the end of at least one line.


How to tie:

Method 1

Form a bight in the middle of the line, and pull it back over itself like a girth hitch. This forms two loops, turned in opposite directions. Give each loop one more full turn in the direction that will tend to tighten it (the wrong direction will undo the loop completely). Pass both loops over the hook, rail or post and pull tight, taking care to push the bight up snugly against the turns.

Method 2

If working end of the line has an eye in it, and the standing end is accessible, the knot can be tied to a closed ring, another eye, or a rail with inaccessible ends, as follows. Pass the eye around the ring or rail, then pass the standing end through its own eye (this effectively forms a girth hitch). Then pass the standing end through the eye again, and pull up tight, taking care to push the bight up snugly against the turns.
When using the cat's paw to join two eyes, this process may be repeated several times to give several turns - as many as five in a fine fishing monofilament. Then when tightened, instead of pulling the bight up against the turns, both eyes are pulled equally, to make neat coils of turns in both eyes, meeting halfway between them.
Clove hitch
Clove hitch
Knot clove.jpg

Use: This knot is the "general utility" hitch for when you need a quick, simple method of fastening a rope around a post, spar or stake (like tying wicks to sticks in Candlemaking) or another rope (as in Macrame)

How to tie:

    Make a turn with the rope around the object and over itself.
    Take a second turn with the rope around the object.
    Pull the end up under the second turn so it is between the rope and the object. Tighten by pulling on both ends.

Constrictor knot
Constrictor Knot
Constrictor-ABOK-1249.jpg

Use: The Constrictor knot is one of the most effective binding knots. Simple and secure, it is a harsh knot which can be difficult or impossible to untie once tightened. It is made similarly to a clove hitch but with one end passed under the other, forming an overhand knot under a riding turn. Because this knot will not slip when tied around a stick, it is an excellent knot for making a rope ladder.

How to tie:

    Make a turn around the object and bring the working end back over the standing part.
    Continue around behind the object.
    Pass the working end over the standing part and then under the riding turn and standing part, forming an overhand knot under a riding turn.
    Be sure the ends emerge between the two turns as shown. Pull firmly on the ends to tighten.


WARNING: The Constrictor knot's severe bite, which makes it so effective, can damage or disfigure items it is tied around.


Crown knot
Crown Knot

Use: Used a component in a back splice and in the double crown knot. Can be used to temporarily prevent the ends of a laid rope from unraveling.

How to tie:

    Make a constriction around the rope about 7.5 cm3 inches from the end. You can constrict it by tying a constrictor knot around the rope with a bit of twine, or you can tape it.
    Unravel the end of the rope all the way to the constriction.
    Bind the ends of the strands with tape to keep them from unraveling.
    Double one strand (strand A) over itself and lay it between the other two (strands B and C), leaving a loop in its center.
    Pull strand B over the end of strand A and lay it between strands A and C.
    Pass strand C through the loop made in strand A.
    Tighten all three strands carefully.

See http://www.ropeworks.biz/archive/Acrown.html for an animation.
Double bow
Double bowline
Nœud de calfat.jpg



How to tie:

    Make a loop with the running end crossing over the standing end.
    Make a larger loop that passes over the first loop, again with the running end passing over the standing end.
    Pass the running end through the first loop from the bottom.
    Wrap the running end behind the standing end, and back down through the first loop.
    Tighten

Double sheet bend
Double sheet bend
Double sheet bend.jpg

Use: The double sheet bend or double becket bend is a strong knot used to tie two ropes (usually of different thicknesses or rigidity) together. It is a doubled version of the sheet bend.

How to tie:
To tie the double sheet bend, start by making a bight in the larger line. Pass the working end of the smaller line up through the bight, around behind the bight, and beneath the loop in the smaller line (that's a sheet bend). Then once again, pass the working end along the same path, around behind the bight and beneath the loop in the smaller line.

WARNING: As with the standard sheet bend, the two free ends should end up on the same side of the knot. If they do not, a left-handed double sheet bend results, which is much weaker.
Figure eight
Figure Eight
Knot figure eight.jpg

Use: This knot is ideal for keeping the end of a rope from running out of tackle or pulley.

How to tie:

    Make underhand loop, bringing end around and over the standing part.
    Pass end under, then up through the loop.
    Draw up tight.

Fisherman's bend
Fisherman's knot
Noeud de pécheur déserré.jpg

Use: The Fisherman's knot is a specialized bend. It consists of two overhand knots wrapped around each other. It works well for joining thin, stiff, or slippery lines. It requires little dexterity to tie, so is often used in stubborn materials. When tightened, it becomes fairly compact, and the free ends can be cropped very close to the knot. These qualities make it very useful for fishing line--it is less likely to jam a fishing rod than many other bends, and is easier to tie with cold, wet hands.

How to tie:
To tie the fisherman's knot, lay the two ends to be tied alongside each other and facing opposite ways. Tie an overhand knot on the first rope and pass the second rope through the loop formed. Tighten the overhand knot, to prevent the line inside it from flopping around. Then tie another overhand knot on the second rope with the first rope passing through it.
Fisherman's loop
Fisherman's loop

Use: The fisherman's loop makes a non-slip loop at the end of a rope.

How to tie:
This knot is the same as a fisherman's bend, except that instead of joining two ropes together, a single rope is doubled over and then joined to itself forming a loop.
Halter hitch
Halter hitch, Hitching tie

Use: The halter hitch, sometimes called a hitching tie is used to tie the lead rope, which is attached to a horse's halter (or to a boat), to a post or hitching rail. The benefit of the halter hitch is that it can be released by pulling on one end of the rope. Even if there is tension on the horse-side of the rope it can still be release with ease.

How to tie:

    Pass the working end of the rope over the standing part.

    Pass the working end behind the loop.

    Create a bight in the working end of the rope. The bight is then passed in front of the main loop and into the second loop.

    Tighten the hitch by pulling on the standing end and the bight. The hitch can be finished by passing the working end through the bight.


Hunter's bend
Hunter's bend
Hunters Bend Final.jpg
Hunters Bend HowTo.jpg

Use: The Hunter's bend (aka Rigger's bend) is used to join two lines. It consists of interlocking overhand knots, and can jam under moderate strain. Hunter's bend is one of the most recent knots to be discovered. It appeared on the front page of The Times in 1978 and was credited to Dr. Edward Hunter. Dr. Hunter used it for years to tie broken shoelaces before discovering its originality through a friend in the 1970s. When it appeared on the front page, it led to much publicity for the knot and also to the foundation of the International Guild of Knot Tyers. However, the knot was presented in Knots for Mountaineering by Phil Smith ca. 1956.


Lariat or Bowstring knot
Lariat
Hondaknot.jpg

Use: A lariat knot is the loop knot commonly used in a lasso. Its round shape, especially when tied in stiff rope, helps it slide freely along the rope it is tied around.

How to tie:

    Place an overhand knot in the end of the rope.
    Tie a second overhand knot, pass the rope end through it, and tighten.

Lark's head
Lark's head
Cowhitch.png

Use: The lark's head is a knot (specifically, a hitch). Also called a cow hitch, it comprises two half-hitches tied in opposing directions. The cow hitch is often used to connect loop-ended lanyards to handheld electronic equipment, since it can be tied without access to the ends of the fastening loop.

How to tie:
When both the standing parts of the rope are available, the cow hitch can be tied in the following manner:

    Form a bight and pass it through the ring from the underneath.
    Pull the head of the bight downwards, and reach through it, grabbing both standing parts of the rope.
    Pull both standing parts of the rope through the bight.


Man harness knot
Man harness knot
ArtilleryLoop FinalKnot.jpg
ArtilleryLoop HowTo.jpg

Use: The Man harness is a knot with a loop on the bight for non-critical purposes. This knot is used when multiple people are to pull a load. Typically one end of the rope is tied to a load, and one man harness knot per puller will be tied along its length. Each loop is then pulled by a different person.

How to tie:

    Lay the rope flat
    Make a loop in the rope with the running end going beneath the standing part.
    Pull the running end down so that it crosses over the loop.
    Pull the bottom of the loop through the gap between the top of the loop and the running end.


WARNING: The Man harness knot must have the loop loaded or it will slip and contract easily.
Miller's knot
Miller's knot
Millers-Knot-with-Bag-ABOK-1241.jpg

Use: A Miller's knot (also Sack knot or Bag knot) is a binding knot used to secure the opening of a sack or bag. Historically, large sacks often contained grains; thus the association of these knots with the miller's trade. Several knots are known interchangably by these three names. Several variations are shown here.


    This is another depiction of the knot shown above.
    Millers-Knot-ABOK-1242.jpg

    This knot is also a useful hitch and is known by the name Ground-line hitch when used for that purpose.

    This variation is noted as having better binding characteristics than the others.


Packer's knot
Packer's knot
Packers knot.png

Use: The Packer's Knot is a binding knot usually used in smaller line. This knot is sometimes used in baling and in parcel tying.

How to tie:

    Make a figure eight not near the standing end of the rope. Wrap the running end around the "parcel" and pass it through the top loop of the "eight" following the same path as standing end.
    Make a loop in the running end and pass the standing end through it.
    Tighten.

Pipe hitch
Pipe hitch
Pipe hitch2.jpg

Use: The pipe hitch is used for hoisting tubular objects (such as pipes).

How to tie:

    Make four or five turns around the pipe with the rope.
    Bring the running end back to the standing part.
    Tie two half-hitches around the standing part.

Prusik knot
Prusik knot
Prusikhowto4.jpeg

Use: A Prusik (aka Prussik or Prussic) is a friction hitch used in climbing, canyoneering, caving, rope rescue and by arborists to grab a rope (sometimes referred to as a rope-grab). The term Prusik is used both for the knot, for the loops of cord, and for the action (to prusik).

A Prusik rope is a circular loop with a circumference of 20 to 100 cm8-40 inches depending on its intended use. Two Prusik ropes are tied to another rope which is anchored above. When the Prusik knot is under tension, it grabs the rope to which it is tied. When not under tension, it is easily moved. The climber places one foot into each loop, and shifts all of his or her weight to one of them, releasing the tension on the other. The rope without tension is then slid upwards on the vertical rope. The climber then shifts his or her weight to the other loop and slides the first one up. This is repeated until the rope has been ascended. Prusiks will work around two ropes, even two ropes of different diameters. Prusiks provide a high-strength and relatively fail-safe (i.e., they will slip before damaging the rope or breaking) attachment, and are used in some rope-rescue techniques. Prusiks are good to use in hauling systems where multiple rope-grabs may be needed, and where mechanical rope-grabs are not available.
Although the Prusik Climb technique may be called old-school by some, the US Army still includes it in its annual Best Ranger competition. Rangers in the competition routinely make it up a 90 foot rope in under a minute.

How to tie:
The Prusik is tied by wrapping the prusik loop around the rope a number of times (depending on the materials, but usually 3-5 times), and then back through itself, forming a barrel around the rope, with a tail hanging out the middle. When the tail is weighted the turns tighten around the main rope and grab. When weight is removed the loop can be slid along the rope by placing a hand directly on the barrel and pushing. The trick is, if it grabs well, then it is hard to slide along the rope. Breaking the Prusik free from the rope after it has been weighted can be difficult, and is easiest done by pushing the bow, being the loop of cord which runs from the top wrap, over the knot to the bottom wrap, along the tail a little. This loosens the grip of the hitch and makes movement easier.

    Step 1

    Step 2

    Step 3

    Step 4

    Locked while holding tension.

    Slides readily without tension.

Sheepshank
Sheepshank
Sheepshank knot.jpg

Use: The sheepshank knot is used to shorten a length of rope. It comes undone easily unless it is under tension.

WARNING: Keep this knot under tension or it will come untied.


Sheet bend
Sheetbend
Schotstek1.png

Use: The sheet bend knot is excellent for joining two ropes together, especially if the two ropes are not the same size. When tied properly, it will not come undone, and it is easy to untie. It is very similar to the bowline.

How to tie:

    Make a bight at the end of the larger rope (if they are not the same size).
    Run the end of the smaller rope through the bight, entering from the bottom.
    Wrap the end of small rope around the back of the large rope, crossing the short end of the large rope first.
    Tuck the end of the short rope under itself, on top of the bight.


Slip knot
Slip knot
Nœud de galère.jpg

Use: A slip knot is one that will tighten under load, and which can be easily untied by pulling on the running end. This knot is typically a component of more complicated knots, and is generally not used by itself.

How to tie:
A slip knot can be tied by starting an overhand knot, but instead of passing the running end through the loop, pass a bight through instead.

WARNING: If tied as shown in the illustration, the running end (on the right) will pull through the loop if even the slightest load is applied to the standing end (on the left). If one reverses the standing end and running ends in the illustration, the knot is far more stable. As shown, the knot will hold a load on the running end, but not on the standing end.


Slipped half hitch
Slipped half-hitch
SlipperyHitch.jpg

Use: A slipped half-hitch is a knot used to attach a line to a rod or bar. It does not provide great strength compared to some other knots, but it can be tied relatively quickly and released very easily. These characteristics mean that it is used on square-rigged ships for securing the gaskets that bind stowed sails to the yards.

How to tie:
Begin as for a clove hitch, but instead of passing the end of the line through the loop in the final step, pass a bight instead, leaving the end on the original side. Pulling on this end will release the hitch - if tied in a gasket, this will quickly release the sail.

WARNING: Never use this knot in a critical situation. It comes untied at the slightest provocation.


Slipped sheet bend
Slipped sheet bend
Knoten Weberknoten.gif

Use: The slipped sheet bend is used in non-critical situations for temporarily joining two ropes.

How to tie:
Start the same as in tying a regular sheet bend, only pass a bight (light blue in the illustration) under the last rope (dark blue) instead of passing the running end under.

WARNING: The slightest tug on the running end will untie this knot instantly - even if the knot is under load.


Square knot
Square Knot
Knot square.jpg

Use: Also known as a Reef knot, the Square Knot is easily learned and useful for many situations. It is most commonly used to tie two lines together at the ends. This knot is used at sea in reefing and furling sails. It is used in first aid to tie off a bandage or a sling because the knot lies flat.

How to tie:

    Pass left end over and under right end.
    Curve what is now the left end toward the right and cross what is now the right end over and under the left.
    Draw up tight by pulling one end and line away from the other end and line.


WARNING: Do not rely on this knot to hold weight in a life or death situation. It has been known to fail.


Stevedore's knot
Stevedore knot
Finished stevedore knot
Stevedore knot before tightening

Use: The Stevedore knot is a stopper knot, often tied near the end of a rope. It is more bulky and less prone to jamming than the closely related figure-eight knot. This knot is excellent for anchoring a tarp. Pass the end of the rope through a tarp's grommet, tie a stevedore, and anchor the other end with a taut-line hitch. Its added bulk prevents it from pulling through the grommet.

How to tie:
The knot is formed by following the steps to make a figure-eight knot, but the working end makes an additional round turn around the standing part before the end passes back through the initial loop.
Strangle knot
Strangle knot
Strangle-knot-ABOK-1239.jpg

Use: The Strangle knot is a simple binding knot. Similar to the constrictor knot, it also features an overhand knot under a riding turn. The difference is that the ends emerge at the outside edges, rather than between the turns as for a constrictor. This knot is actually a rearranged double overhand knot and makes up each half of the double fisherman's knot. When tightened, it is very slip-resistant. It is ideal for constructing a pilot ladder (like a rope ladder, but with wooden rungs).



Surgeon's knot
Surgeon's knot
Surgeon's knot (tying).jpg

Use: The surgeon's knot is similar to a square knot, except that the first stage is doubled. This helps the knot stay tight while it is being tied.


Taut-line hitch
Taut-line hitch
TautlineHitch-ABOK-1800.jpg

Use: The Taut-Line Hitch is an adjustable loop knot for use on lines under tension. It is useful when the length of a line will need to be periodically adjusted in order to maintain tension. It is made by tying a Rolling hitch around the standing part after passing around an anchor object. Tension is maintained by sliding the hitch to adjust size of the loop, thus changing the effective length of the standing part without retying the knot. When under tension, however, the knot will grip the cord and will be difficult to cause to slip.

It is typically used for securing tent lines in outdoor activities involving camping, by arborists when climbing trees, for creating adjustable moorings in tidal areas, and to secure loads on vehicles. A versatile knot, the Taut-line hitch was even used by astronauts during STS-82, the second Space Shuttle mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope.

How to tie:

    Pass the working end around the anchor object. Bring it back along side of the standing part and make a half-hitch around the standing part.
    Continue with another wrap inside the loop, effectively making a round turn around the standing part.
    Complete with a half-hitch outside the loop, made in the same direction as the first two wraps, as for a clove hitch.
    Dress by snugging the hitch firmly around the standing part. Load slowly and adjust as necessary.


Timber hitch
Timber hitch
Timber Hitch Final.jpg
Timber Hitch HowTo.jpg

Use: The timber hitch is a knot used to attach a single length of rope to a piece of wood. This knot is easily undone after use.

How to tie:

    To make the knot, pass the rope completely around the wood.
    Pass the running end around the standing part, then through the loop that you have just formed.
    Make three turns around the loop then pull on the standing part to tighten.
    Take care that you double the rope back on itself before making the three turns, or it won't hold.
    Three are recommended for natural rope such as jute, whereas five turns are needed on synthetic rope like nylon.

This knot is also known as the Bowyer's Knot as it is used to attach the lower end of the bowstring to the bottom limb on an English Longbow.
Two half hitches
Two half hitches
Knot 2 half hitches.jpg

Use: This reliable knot is quickly tied and is the hitch most often used in mooring.

How to tie:

    Pass end of rope around post or other object.
    Wrap short end of rope under and over long part of rope, pushing the end down through the loop. This is a half hitch.
    Repeat on long rope below first half hitch and draw up tight.